This uses an H-bridge circuit. 
It contains a reversible motor, with its 2 leads represented by M-1 and M-2. 
The motor reverses the current and turns it positive or negative. 
When there’s a forward bias, the transistor will turn on. The current alternately flows from Q3 to Q4, and from Q1 to Q2.

When one set has a negative current flowing through it, the other set has a positive current, and vice versa. 
The positive current will first flow from Q3 to M-2, then become negative when it flows from M-1 to Q4 - after the current is reversed through the motor. 
This condition is achieved when D1 is powered, turning on transistors 3 and 4. 
In this case, M-2 will be positive and M-1 will be negative. 
The following will describe the process. 
When D1 (base of transistor) is high (5V), then the collector and emitter of the transistor is turned on. 
This activates Q4 (transistor 4). So, the collector of Q4 becomes grounded, causing M-1 to become grounded. 
Then, the Q3 base, in turn, also becomes grounded and Q3 becomes conductive. 
Collector and emitter take the same path for the Q3 transistor, causing M-2 to be positive (5V).

In another situation, a negative current will flow from Q1 to M-1, then become positive when it flows from M-2 to Q2. 
This condition is achieved when D0 is powered, turning on transistors transistors 1 and 2. 
In this case, M-2 will be negative and M-1 will be positive. 
The following will describe the process. 
When D1 becomes zero, then D0 gets a +5V charge. Q2 becomes energized/conductive. 
The collector of Q2 becomes grounded, causing M-2 to become grounded (negatively charged). 
Then the Q1 base, in turn, becomes grounded as well and Q1 becomes conductive because the collector and emitter take the same path, causing M-1 to be 5V (positively charged).

This continuous pattern allows the motor to reverse and allows a constant flow of current. 
Alternately, the circuit will go from step 1 to step 2, depending on the D0 and D1 bias voltage. 
In this process, the resistors and diodes play a role as well. The diode prevents a reverse flow of the current. 
The resistors limit the amount of current flowing through the circuit to the base of the transistor.

